# jQuery for journalists

jQuery is a JavaScript **library**. A library is a collection of **functions, methods** and other functionality that has typically been created to tackle a particular problem with basic JavaScript cannot tackle alone.

(Functions and methods are basically recipes for performing an action like 'hide this element' or 'add up these numbers')

Examples of the problems include libraries for data visualisation, for app creation, for data handling, for scraping, and so on.

Libraries exist in other programming languages as well. The Python and Ruby programming languages use libraries for similar problems; and R has them too - only it calls them 'packages'. 

jQuery is a library of functions which make it easier to manipulate HTML elements and make a page more interactive and 'animated'. 

For example, if you've ever seen longform immersive features like Snow Fall, those fancy fades and moving elements are often created with jQuery functions like `fadeOut()`.

It is also one of the most popular JavaScript libraries around, and so probably the one you are most likely to have to work with. In fact, if you believe the Wikipedia entry ([citations here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JQuery#cite_note-3)) it is *the* most popular.

But most of all, it makes your life a lot easier than if you tried to do the same things with basic JavaScript alone.

## Getting started: loading the jQuery library

In order to use all of the loveliness that jQuery gives us you first need to **load** the library. There are a few ways you can do this:

* Download the jQuery library yourself from [jquery.com/download](https://jquery.com/download/) and link to that
* Link to the jQuery library somewhere on the web

The second option is much easier, and indeed [the jQuery website itself uses this approach](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/547384/where-do-you-include-the-jquery-library-from-google-jsapi-cdn). 

To do this, create a basic skeleton for your HTML page like so:

`<html>`

`<head>`

`</head>`

`<body>`

`</body>`

`</html>`

Then make sure you are within the `<head>` tags of your HTML, and create a `<script>` tag with the `src=` attribute pointing to the Google API. Close that tag straight away so it looks like this:

`<html>`

`<head>`

`<script src="https://ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/libs/jquery/1.12.0/jquery.min.js"></script>`

`</script>`

`</head>`

`<body>`

`</body>`

`</html>`

You don't have to use the version hosted by Google: [Microsoft also has one](http://www.w3schools.com/jquery/jquery_get_started.asp).

However you load it, once that's done you are now ready to add some jQuery.

## Adding some HTML which the jQuery is going to affect

jQuery is all about manipulating the **DOM**. DOM is an acronym for Document Object Model, and is just a fancy way of saying 'the webpage' (although it can also be used to refer to other types of documents, like XML files).

In order to manipulate 'the DOM' we need some HTML tags to manipulate. So, add a simple heading and paragraph tag within your `<body>` tag like so:

`<body>`

`<h2>This is a heading</h2>`

`<p>This is a paragraph.</p>`

`</body>`

Save your file - make sure you add a `.html` extension - and then open it in a web browser like Chrome or Firefox to check that it's worked.

## Adding the jQuery to change those HTML tags

Now we need another pair of `<script>` tags within our body to contain our jQuery:

`<body>`

`<h2>This is a heading</h2>`

`<p>This is a paragraph.</p>`

`<script>`

`console.log('JavaScript running!');`

`$('p').text("No it isn't.");`

`</script>`

`</body>`

Reload your page and open up the Inspector by right-clicking on the page and selecting **Inspect**. The 'inspector' should appear. It will normally default to the *Elements* view but you need to change to the **Console** view. You can [find out more about the Inspector in Chrome here](https://developer.chrome.com/devtools/docs/console), or [in Firefox here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Tools/Web_Console).

When you load this page with the Inspector open, you should see the message you just typed in that script: `'JavaScript running!'`

This is generated by the `console.log` command. If instead you see any errors, try to look at the line that's generating it (this should be in the console too, on the right) and what might be causing it. Often it's a missing character, an unnecessary character, or characters in the wrong order.

Now let's add some actual jQuery:

`<body>`

`<h2>This is a heading</h2>`

`<p>This is a paragraph.</p>`

`<script>`

`console.log('JavaScript running!');`

`$('p').text('No it is not.');`

`</script>`

`</body>`

The first bit of jQuery is `$('p').text("No it isn't.")`. We'll break that down in a minute. First, make the change and see what happens.

When you save this and load the page again, you should see that the paragraph text has changed. That's what this code does.

The first part of that code is the dollar sign `$`. This means `jQuery` and anything after it in brackets is what you are affecting with your jQuery.

In those brackets is the `p` tag, in inverted commas: `$('p')`

This means we are going to affect something about the `<p>` tags on this page.

*What* we are going to affect is the text within those tags. And we do that using `.text` method. You can [find out more about that in the jQuery documentation here](https://api.jquery.com/text/)

So far, `$('p').text` means 'grab the p tags and do something to the text in those tags'. What `.text` does is *replace* the text inside those tags with whatever we put in brackets after the method. So, `('No it is not.')` means 'put the string `No it is not.` inside that `p` tag.

But it's important to point out that this will affect *all* `p` tags on our page

To target more specifically we need to describe our content more carefully by using extra **attributes**, such as `class=`, `id=` and so on.

TIP: there's a lot more we can do with `.text`, including grabbing text. Another method to use is `.html` which also allows us to grab or add extra HTML code inside targeted tags; and `.val`, which allows us to grab values inside a form.

## Next: targeting by class and id attribute
